Open Letter for Novavax access

Dear health care organizations around the world,

We are writing to you today in advance of the fall 2023 COVID-19 vaccination
campaign to request something very important: equitable access to the Novavax
vaccine in all areas.

As you know, many factors affect the health of individuals and communities, and
many of us are learning about the social determinants of health. It has been
shown repeatedly that SARS-CoV-2 disproportionately affects racialized people,
and people with lower household incomes. Furthermore, long COVID has been found
to date to disproportionately affect women. One of many ways to reduce the
burden of SARS-CoV-2 is to remove barriers to vaccination. When people have to
travel long distances at specific times to receive a vaccine, this is a
significant barrier. Having the Novavax vaccine available would be a
straightforward way to address this barrier.

Why is access to Novavax specifically important? While the mRNA vaccines have
been given to most people seeking vaccination and have prevented many
hospitalizations and deaths, there is growing evidence that Novavax, a protein
subunit vaccine, achieves  comparable or in some studies favourable protection
with fewer side-effects. The protection achieved by the Novavax vaccine has also
been demonstrated to be longer lasting. Waning immunity against infection is a
serious issue that drives waves of increased infections (and subsequently,
incidences of long COVID, hospitalization, staff shortages, school absences,
interruptions to services, and death) in our communities.

For the many people who have already had mRNA vaccine doses, Novavax is a
beneficial option to broaden their protection. And for the small number of
people who staunchly wish to avoid mRNA vaccines or who cannot receive the
Pfizer or Moderna COVID vaccines for other reasons, it’s an essential pathway to
protection from SARS-CoV-2.

Here are some findings from recent studies that show why access to Novavax is
important:

A large study in Korea of Novavax vaccinations for primary series and/or booster
doses found "reporting rate of adverse events after Novavax COVID-19 vaccination
among persons aged 18 years and over was 132.7 per 100,000 doses administered.
This rate was lowest compared to that reported following other COVID-19 vaccines
in Korea." [Safety surveillance of the NVX-CoV2373 COVID-19 vaccine among
Koreans aged 18 years and over, Vaccine, 7 Aug 2023](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2023.06.077).

While Novavax is not yet generally available for adolescents, another study
showed promising results for adolescents who received a Novavax dose after an
initial mRNA dose: “NVXCoV2373 following 30µg BNT162b2 as a first dose elicited
the highest humoral and peak cellular immune responses. Neutralising antibodies
against Omicron BA.1 and BA.2 were higher after NVXCoV2373 than a two-dose 30µg
BNT162b2 schedule. The lowest rate of SARS-CoV-2 breakthrough infections
occurred in participants who received NVXCoV2373 as their second dose. Enhanced
protection may be provided by heterologous vaccine schedules using NVXCoV2373
than the homologous BNT162b2 schedule.” “For infections up to day 132 post
second dose, seronegative NVX participants had an 89% reduction in the adjusted
risk of a ‘breakthrough infection’ compared to BNT-30 [adjusted hazard ratio
(aHR) 0.11 (95% CI: 0.01, 0.86)]” <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jinf.2023.06.007>
[Reactogenicity, immunogenicity and breakthrough infections following
heterologous or fractional second dose COVID-19 vaccination in adolescents
(Com-COV3): A randomised controlled trial, Journal of Infection, September
2023](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jinf.2023.06.007).

For some immunosuppressed people, such as the patients with MS in this study, 2
doses of Novavax vaccine allowed them to develop antibodies, which they had not
done after mRNA vaccine: “Vaccination with two doses of NVX-CoV2373 was able to
elicit a SARS-CoV-2-specific immune response in pwMS lacking adequate immune
responses to previous mRNA/viral vector vaccination.” NVX-CoV2373-induced T- and
B-cellular immunity in immunosuppressed people with multiple sclerosis that
failed to respond to mRNA and viral vector SARS-CoV-2 vaccines. [Front. Immunol., 20 July
2023](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2023.1081933).

Canadian researcher Dr. Jeff Gilchrist has also made available a number of
summaries of presentations by Novavax as well as published papers; his summaries
are available here:
<https://threadreaderapp.com/thread/1678360881313226753.html>,
<https://threadreaderapp.com/thread/1621843982857785344.html>,
<https://threadreaderapp.com/thread/1597228107919826946.html>

At the beginning of the pandemic and through the initial vaccine roll-out,
governments and healthcare worked together to stop chains of transmission and to
educate the public all about SARS-CoV-2. As the SARS-CoV-2 virus has continued
to kill, sicken, and disable people, governments and institutions at all levels
have backed away from their previous involvement in educating the public and
providing resources for people and communities. SARS-CoV-2 continues to harm our
friends and neighbours, and there is still no treatment for Long COVID, which
has been found so far to affect people of all ages at a rate of 1 in 10
infections at a minimum. Many places still do not have a long COVID clinic,
despite the fact that PHAC has been informing provincial public health in all
provinces about long COVID since summer 2020
(<https://popnb.substack.com/p/omission-is-negligence>). While institutions have
been eager to move on from the pandemic, work by Dr. Tara Moriarty shows that
Canada is still experiencing significant excess deaths, which indicates that the
danger to the public has not passed
(<https://covid19resources.ca/public/excess-mortality-tracker/>). Our hospitals
have a higher baseline of patients in all seasons. SARS-CoV-2 may not be filling
up ICUs at the moment, but it contributes to ill health in our communities by
rendering people significantly more susceptible to diabetes, heart problems, and
strokes - among other undesirable impacts from this virus which affects our
vascular system. Post-COVID sequelae do not discriminate; they also affect
healthcare workers which contributes negatively to our healthcare human
resources. For more on post-COVID condition, please see this March 9, 2023
report by Canada’s Chief Science Advisor:
<https://science.gc.ca/site/science/en/office-chief-science-advisor/initiatives-covid-19/post-covid-19-condition-canada-what-we-know-what-we-dont-know-and-framework-action>

The only way to avoid long COVID is to avoid catching COVID, and avoiding
re-infection, since one can also contract long COVID on subsequent infections.
Vaccination is just one layer in the overall strategy to avoid infection, which
also includes masking wearing the best mask one can (ideally an N95 respirator
that fits well, since COVID is airborne), avoiding crowds, reducing contact with
others, etc. However, it is an important layer, since taking a few minutes out
of your day to receive a vaccine can help protect you against infection, serious
illness, protects (minimally, with today’s vaccines) against long COVID, and
very well against hospitalization and death from COVID. Getting a vaccine every
6 months should only take a few minutes, not a 7-8 hour return trip to the only
pharmacy in the province that makes Novavax available.

Thank you for the time you took to read this letter. I hope this has
demonstrated why equitable access to the Novavax SARS-CoV-2 vaccine is worth
achieving. Between the lower incidence of side effects and the increased breadth
and durability of protection, people have many reasons to prefer a Novavax
vaccine dose, especially now in this highly individualized phase of the ongoing
pandemic. People deserve equitable access to the tools to protect ourselves. I
look forward to hearing about Novavax access throughout the world.

This letter was inspired by <https://twitter.com/nb_covid_info>.
